Add Zombienet docs (#3)
papermoonio/polkadot-ecosystem-docs-draft: docs/dev-tools/zombienet/overview.md

---
title: Using Zombienet to spawn ephemeral substrate based networks
description: Diving deeper into Zombienet, a versatile tool enabling the creation of temporary substrate networks for testing purposes
---

# Zombienet

## Introduction
Zombienet is a testing framework designed for Substrate-based blockchains. It provides a simple CLI tool for creating and testing blockchain environments locally or across networks. It supports various backend providers, including Kubernetes, Podman, and native setups for running blockchain nodes. 

> The framework enables developers to create tests using natural language tools, allowing them to verify on-chain storage, metrics, logs, and custom interactions with the blockchain. It is particularly effective for setting up local relaychains with validators and parachains with collators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The framework enables developers to create tests using natural language tools to verify on-chain storage, metrics, logs, and custom interactions with the blockchain. It is particularly effective for setting up local relaychains with validators and parachains with collators.
```

> This framework has been designed and developed by [Parity Technologies](https://www.parity.io/){target=_blank}, now mantained by the Zombienet team. For further support and information, refer to the following contact points:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Parity Technologies](https://www.parity.io/){target=_blank} has designed and developed this framework, now maintained by the Zombienet team. For further support and information, refer to the following contact points:
```

    
- [Zombienet repository](https://github.com/paritytech/zombienet){target=_blank}
- [Element public channel](https://matrix.to/#/!FWyuEyNvIFygLnWNMh:parity.io?via=parity.io&via=matrix.org&via=web3.foundation){target=_blank}

> ## Installation

Reviewer: We've used it for things like showing the npm install vs yarn (example: https://docs.moonbeam.network/builders/integrations/indexers/thegraph/#install-graph-cli) 

I'm unsure about something this extensive, though. On the one hand, it looks nice and clean. On the other hand, I can see where people could possibly miss some info. The other downside to these tabs is losing the subheadings under Installations on the right. 

Here is an example of it in expanded sections for reference & comparison: https://docs.moonbeam.network/builders/integrations/indexers/covalent/#using-curl

This comes down to preference @albertov19

> ## Installation

Reviewer 2: Doing a drive by 🚗 ...

For install instructions, it's not like they're going to install it three different ways. So I actually don't mind it being in tabs. I think it makes the page a bit shorter. But I don't like all the notes and warnings. I think some of them are repetitive/can be embedded into the text of the page instead

> Zombienet releases can be found on the [Zombienet repository]( https://github.com/paritytech/zombienet ){target=_blank}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Zombienet releases are available on the [Zombienet repository]( https://github.com/paritytech/zombienet ){target=_blank}.
```

In order to install Zombienet, there are multiple options available, depending on the user's preferences and the environment where it will be used. The following section will guide you through the installation process for each of the available options.

> === "Using the executable" 

Author: Yep, I checked on Moonbeam and Tanssi docs, and they use CamelCase; you are right 👍

    ```bash
    ./zombienet-macos-arm64 version
    ```

    !!! note
        If you want to add the `zombienet` executable to your PATH, you can move it to a directory in your PATH, such as `/usr/local/bin`:
        ```bash
        mv zombienet-macos-arm64 /usr/local/bin/zombienet
        ```

=== "Using Nix"

    For Nix users, the Zombienet repository provides a [`flake.nix`](https://github.com/paritytech/zombienet/blob/main/flake.nix){target=_blank} file that can be used to install Zombienet. This means that users can easily incorporate Zombienet into their Nix-based projects. 
    
    To install Zombienet utilizing Nix, users can run the following command, triggering the fetching of the flake and subsequently installing the Zombienet package.

    ```bash
    nix run github:paritytech/zombienet/<INSERT_ZOMBIENET_VERSION> -- \
    spawn <INSERT_ZOMBIENET_CONFIG_FILE_NAME>.toml
    ```

    !!! Warning
        To run the command above, you need to have [nix flakes enabled](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Flakes#Enable_flakes){target=_blank}.

>     Alternatively, you can also include the zombienet binary in the PATH for the current shell. This can be achieved by:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Alternatively, you can also include the Zombienet binary in the PATH for the current shell. This can be achieved by:
```

    Now, inside the Docker container, you can run the Zombienet CLI commands. First, you need to set up ZombieNet downloading the neccessary binaries:

    ```bash
    npm run zombie -- setup polkadot polkadot-parachain
    ```

    After that, you need to add those binaries to the PATH:

    ```bash
    export PATH=/home/nonroot/zombie-net:$PATH
    ```

    Finally, you can run the Zombienet CLI commands. For example, to spawn a network using a specific configuration file, you can run the following command:

    ```bash
    npm run zombie -- -p native spawn host-current-files/minimal.toml
    ```

    !!! warning
        The command above mounts the current directory to the `/workspace` directory inside the Docker container. This allows Zombienet to access the configuration file and other files in the current directory. If you want to mount a different directory, replace `$(pwd)` with the desired directory path.

## Providers

> Zombienet is a Javascript library designed to run on Node.js and support different backend providers to run the nodes. At this moment [Kubernetes]( https://kubernetes.io/ ){target=_blank}, [Podman]( https://podman.io/ ){target=_blank} and, native are supported.

Author: Yes, "native" in this context means "local." I used "native" instead of "local" because the tool consistently uses that term throughout the entire project. Do you think it's worth adding a brief sentence explaining that "Zombienet native equals running a local process in your environments" or something similar?

> Zombienet is a Javascript library designed to run on Node.js and support different backend providers to run the nodes. At this moment [Kubernetes]( https://kubernetes.io/ ){target=_blank}, [Podman]( https://podman.io/ ){target=_blank} and, native are supported.

Author: Yes, internally the project has been built as a js library

https://paritytech.github.io/zombienet/intro.html#what-is-zombienet:~:text=Internally%2C-,it%27s%20a%20JS%20library,-designed%20to%20run

Here it's the link to the project cli source code: https://github.com/paritytech/zombienet/tree/main/javascript/packages/cli

It's important to note that each provider has specific requirements and associated features. The subsequent sections will guide you through the installation process for each provider and the requirements and features each provider offers.

> ### Kubernetes

Reviewer: It looks nice. Would having Requirements and Features as tab names rather than subsection titles affect SEO or discoverability?

> ### Kubernetes

Reviewer 2: I actually do not like it in this instance, because it's not like a user is choosing either "Requirements" or "Features", ideally, they read both tabs. So in a case like that where it's not one or the other, we shouldn't use tabs

> ### Kubernetes

Reviewer 2: But to answer your question @dawnkelly09 , no, it would not impact SEO

        Currently, Podman can only be used with Zombienet on Linux machines. Although Podman has support for macOS through an internal VM, the Zombienet provider code requires Podman to run natively on Linux.

=== "Features"
    
    Using Podman, Zombienet deploys additional pods to enhance the monitoring and visibility of the active network. Specifically, pods for Prometheus, Tempo, and Grafana are included in the deployment. Grafana is configured with Prometheus and Tempo as datasources.

    Upon launching Zombienet, access to these monitoring services is facilitated through specific URLs provided in the output:

    - Prometheus - [http://127.0.0.1:34123](http://127.0.0.1:34123){target=_blank}
    - Tempo - [http://127.0.0.1:34125](http://127.0.0.1:34125){target=_blank}
    - Grafana - [http://127.0.0.1:41461](http://127.0.0.1:41461){target=_blank}

    It's important to note that Grafana is deployed with default admin access.

    !!! note
        When the network operations cease—either by halting a running spawn with Ctrl+C or upon completion of the test—all associated pods, including those for Prometheus, Tempo, and Grafana, are automatically removed by Zombienet.

> ### Native

Author: Yes, I found it quite confusing as well. I'd propose sorting this out in [this thread](https://github.com/papermoonio/polkadot-ecosystem-docs-draft/pull/3#discussion_r1686412487). There, I mentioned why I kept using `native` even though IMO is not the clearest term

> ### Native

Reviewer 3: It is fine to move away from these narratives if we believe is a bit clearer for external developers. We can also refer it to "local" or whatever and in the first instance we can state "also referred to as Native"

=== "Requirements"
    
    The Zombienet Native provider enables you to run nodes as local processes in your environments. You simply need to have the necessary binaries for your network (such as `polkadot` and `polkadot-parachain`). You can choose to set it up by configuring your network file or using the `--provider` flag in the CLI.

    !!! note
        The native provider exclusively utilizes the command config for nodes/collators, which supports both relative and absolute paths. You can employ the `default_command` config to specify the binary for spawning all nodes in the relaychain.

=== "Features"
    Currently, the Native provider does not execute any additional layers or processes.

> ## CLI Usage

Reviewer 3: maybe provide a genric example before start showing some of the commands? For example:

```
zombienet <command> <arguments>
```

|  `setup`  |                           Set up the dev environment of Zombienet ready.                           |                                                                                         `<binaries>` - executables that will be downloaded and prepared to be used by Zombienet. Options: `polkadot`, `polkadot-parachain`                                                                                          |
| `convert` | Transforms a (now deprecated) polkadot-launch configuration file to a zombienet configuration file | `<filePath>` - path to a [Polkadot Launch](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-launch){target=_blank} configuration file with a .js or .json extension defined by [this structure](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-launch/blob/295a6870dd363b0b0108e745887f51e7141d7b5f/src/types.d.ts#L10){target=_blank} |

> | `version` |                                      Prints zombienet version                                      |                                                                                                                                                          -                                                                                                                                                           |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `version` |                                      Prints Zombienet version                                      |                                                                                                                                                          -                                                                                                                                                           |
```

|         `node_spawn_timeout`         | Number  | Timeout to spawn pod/process                                                                              | `per provider`                           |
|              `local_ip`              | String  | IP used for exposing local services (rpc/metrics/monitors)                                                | `"127.0.0.1"`                            |
|           `node_verifier`            | String  | Allow managing how to verify node readiness or disable (None)                  | `Metric`                                 |

For example, the following configuration file defines a minimal example for the settings:

=== "base-example.toml"
    ```toml
    [settings]
    timeout = 1000
    bootnode = false
    provider = "kubernetes"
    backchannel = false
    ...
    ```

=== "base-example.json"
    ```json
    {
        "settings": {
            "timeout": 1000,
            "bootnode": false,
            "provider": "kubernetes",
            "backchannel": false,
            ...
        },
        ...
    }
    ```

> ### Relaychain

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Relay Chain Configuration
```

> The `relaychain` keyword is used to define further parameters for the relaychain. The following keys are available:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use the `relaychain` keyword to define further parameters for the relay chain at start up. The following keys are available:
```

        default_image = "polkadot-debug:master"
        chain = "rococo-local"
        chain_spec_path = "/path/to/chain-spec.json"
        default_args = ["--chain", "rococo-local"]

        [[relaychain.node_groups]]
        name = "group-1"
        count = 2
        image = "polkadot-debug:master"
        command = "polkadot"
        args = ["--chain", "rococo-local"]
        ...
        ```

    === "relaychain-example-node-groups.json"
        ```json
        {
            ...,
            "relaychain": {
                "default_command": "polkadot",
                "default_image": "polkadot-debug:master",
                "chain": "rococo-local",
                "chain_spec_path": "/path/to/chain-spec.json",
                "default_args": ["--chain", "rococo-local"],
                "node_groups": [
                    {
                        "name": "group-1",
                        "count": 2,
                        "image": "polkadot-debug:master",
                        "command": "polkadot",
                        "args": ["--chain", "rococo-local"]
                    }
                ],
                ...
            },
            ...
        }
        ```

> ### Parachain

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Parachain Configuration
```

> The `parachain` keyword is used to define further parameters for the parachain. The following keys are available:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use the `parachain` to define further parameters for the parachain at startup. The following keys are available:
```

    For example, the following configuration file defines a minimal example for the collator groups:

    === "collator-groups-example.toml"
        ```toml
        [parachain]
        id = 100
        add_to_genesis = true
        cumulus_based = true
        genesis_wasm_path = "/path/to/wasm"
        genesis_state_path = "/path/to/state"

        [[parachain.collator_groups]]
        name = "group-1"
        count = 2
        image = "polkadot-parachain"
        command = "polkadot-parachain"
        ...
        ```
    
    === "collator-groups-example.json"
        ```json
        {
          "parachain": {
            "id": 100,
            "add_to_genesis": true,
            "cumulus_based": true,
            "genesis_wasm_path": "/path/to/wasm",
            "genesis_state_path": "/path/to/state",
            "collator_groups": [
              {
                "name": "group-1",
                "count": 2,
                "image": "polkadot-parachain",
                "command": "polkadot-parachain",
                ...
              },
            ],
          },
          ...
        }
        ```

> ### HRMP Channels

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### XCM Configuration
```

Reviewer 3: A bit more future proof

> The `hrmp_channels` keyword is used to define further parameters for the HRMP channels. The following keys are available:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use the `hrmp_channels` keyword to define further parameters for the XCM channels at startup. The following keys are available:
```
